Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
it's part three of our three-part
mini-series on the theme of animals.
In part one, we learned about
man's best friend, the loyal dog.
In part two, we explored
the enigmatic cat.
And today, in part three, we're
going to talk about an animal
that never existed at all.
The dragon.
OK then, let's not waste a
minute and get right into it.
Imagine you're a peasant farmer in
medieval England, around the year 1200.
You've never travelled more
than a few kilometres from the
village where you were born.
You can't read.
You've never seen a map.
You have little idea what lies beyond
the forest at the edge of your world.
But you know, with absolute
certainty, that dragons exist.
You know they're serpentine
creatures with scales like armour.
You know they breathe fire.
You know they often
hoard treasure in caves.
You know that knights sometimes
hunt them, and that slaying a dragon
is the ultimate test of courage.
And in fact, just 150 years later,
your country, England, would make
a dragon slayer its patron saint.
Now, imagine you're a scholar in Song
Dynasty China, at a similar time.
You live thousands of
kilometres from England.
Your civilisation has had no meaningful
contact with Europe, and will not
do so for several hundred years.
You too have never
travelled far from home.
But like the English peasant
on the other side of the world,
you know that dragons exist.
For you, they are slightly different.
They are still long, serpentine
creatures with scales.
But their bodies are longer, they
don’t have wings, and they live
in rivers and seas, not caves.
And they don’t typically breathe
fire, but they do have magical powers.
In your culture, dragons control
the weather and bring rain.
They represent imperial
power and ancient wisdom.
And you certainly wouldn’t dream
of killing one – for you, dragons
are benevolent, helpful and wise.
But both you and the English peasant
are thinking of fundamentally
the same type of creature.
And it's not just England and China.
Medieval Wales had dragons.
So did ancient Greece.
And Rome.
And India.
And Japan.
And Vietnam.
And the Vikings.
And the Slavic peoples.
And pre-Columbian Mexico.
Nearly every human culture, across every
continent, across thousands of years of
history, has some version of the dragon.
And this is one of the most remarkable
patterns in all of mythology:
almost every civilisation has
independently decided dragons existed,
despite no evidence they ever did.
And today, we're going to talk about
some of the theories as to why.
Let's start by taking a mini tour of
dragons around the world, because while
they share some common features, they are
fascinatingly different in their details.
And this might give us a few
clues about their origins.
In China, the dragon—or lóng in
Mandarin—is one of the most important
symbols in the entire culture.
It's a creature of water and weather,
associated with rain, rivers, and the sea.
It's typically depicted as an
enormously long, serpentine creature
with four legs, antler-like horns,
and a somewhat feline, cat-like face.
Crucially, Chinese dragons
don't usually have wings.
They fly anyway, through some
kind of supernatural power.
And unlike Western dragons, Chinese
dragons are generally benevolent.
They bring rain to farmers.
They represent wisdom and power.
They were the symbol of the emperor
himself—the emperor sat on the
Dragon Throne, wore robes embroidered
with dragons, and was sometimes
called the "son of the dragon."
To kill a dragon in Chinese
mythology would be unthinkable.
You might seek the favour of a dragon,
or fear its wrath if you angered it,
but dragons were fundamentally good,
or at least neutral forces of nature.
And this concept of the benevolent dragon
is one we see spread throughout East Asia.
In Japan, the dragon is called ryū,
and it's very similar to the Chinese
version—a sort of water deity, a bringer
of rain, associated with the sea.
In Korea, it's called yong.
In Vietnam, rồng.
All serpentine, like snakes, all
powerful, all connected to water.
Now, European dragons, as you will
probably know, were very different.
In medieval European mythology,
dragons were almost uniformly evil.
They were destroyers, not protectors.
They breathed fire, not water.
They hoarded gold and treasure in caves,
jealously guarding it from humans.
They kidnapped princesses, demanded virgin
sacrifices, and terrorised villages.
And their role, their purpose, and
what almost always happens to a dragon
in a story, was to be slain, killed
by some kind of brave warrior; they
were a threat to be extinguished.
In terms of its appearance, the
classic European dragon typically
had four legs and two wings.
It was reptilian, covered in
impenetrable scales, often with a
long tail it could use as a weapon.
Its breath was its most dangerous
feature: fire, of course, flames
that could incinerate a knight
even when wearing full armour.
We see this type of dragon
throughout European mythology.
In the Old English epic Beowulf, the
hero faces a dragon in his final battle.
The dragon has been sleeping on a hoard
of treasure for three hundred years.
When a thief steals a single cup from
the hoard, the dragon wakes in fury
and begins burning the countryside.
Beowulf kills the dragon, but is
mortally wounded in the process.
In Germanic mythology, the hero
Siegfried kills the dragon Fafnir,
who guards a cursed treasure.
He then proceeds to bathe
in the dragon's blood.
In Greek mythology, dragons, or large
serpents, appear throughout the legends,
from Apollo killing the Python to
Heracles fighting the many-headed Hydra.
And in the Christian tradition,
dragons became explicitly
associated with evil and Satan.
The Book of Revelation describes
Satan as a great red dragon
with seven heads and ten horns.
Saint George, the patron saint of
England, is famous for slaying a
dragon that was terrorising a town
and demanding human sacrifices.
The dragon in Christian
symbolism represented paganism,
chaos, the devil himself.
To slay a dragon was to defeat evil.
But dragons weren't
confined to Asia and Europe.
In Mesoamerica, the Aztec and Maya
worshipped Quetzalcoatl, the feathered
serpent, a dragon-like deity associated
with wind, air, and learning.
And similar creatures appear in
Aboriginal Australian mythology,
ancient Egypt, Mesopotamian mythology,
and ancient Norse mythology.
Nearly every culture has one.
They're almost always
serpentine or reptilian.
ancient and powerful.
They're frequently associated
with water—rivers, seas,
rain, the primordial ocean.
They often represent chaos, or primordial
forces, or the power of nature itself.
So the question remains:  why?
Why did humans, independently, across
thousands of kilometres and thousands
of years, all imagine similar creatures?
Well, there are several theories, some
of them more plausible than others.
The first and most obvious explanation
is the one you may know already,
or might be able to hazard a guess:
ancient people found dinosaur fossils.
This theory has been around for a
while, and it makes intuitive sense.
Dinosaur bones have of course existed
for all of human history, but it
wasn't until the 19th century that
humans understood what they were.
So, imagine you’re a shepherd in ancient
Greece and while digging a well for your
village, you uncover an enormous skull
with a large snout and teeth like daggers.
Perfectly understandably, your first
reaction might be that you’ve found the
remains of some kind of reptilian beast.
A terrifying monster.
A dragon.
And we know this happened because we
have historical records of ancient
people finding fossils and interpreting
them as mythological creatures.
The ancient Greeks found large fossils
in quarries and mines and interpreted
them as evidence of giants and monsters.
In China, fossilised bones have been
used in traditional medicine for
thousands of years, where they're
still called "dragon bones"—lóng gǔ.
Even today, you can go to traditional
Chinese medicine shops and buy
powdered "dragon bone," which is
actually fossilised animal remains,
usually from Ice Age mammals.
The ancient Chinese clearly found these
bones, and attributed them to dragons.
So fossils were definitely
part of the inspiration.
But here's the problem: fossils
alone don't explain all the
specific features of dragons.
No fossil breathes fire.
No fossil hoards gold.
No fossil has wings and four legs.
Fossils might explain why ancient people
believed in large, extinct reptiles.
But they don't fully explain why
those reptiles, across different
cultures, all had such similar
supernatural abilities and behaviours.
For that, we need to look deeper.
And this brings us to theory number
two, which is perhaps a little more out
there, controversial and implausible,
but worth mentioning in any case.
And that’s that dragons somehow represent
our deepest, most ancient fears.
Specifically, dragons might be a
combination of the predators that hunted
our ancestors for millions of years,
and that somehow, somewhere in our DNA
is hardwired this primordial fear of
the various predators that pursued us.
Think about it this way.
For most of human evolutionary history—so
going back hundreds of thousands of
years—our early ancestors lived in
constant fear of being killed and eaten.
And the predators that ate us
fell into three main categories.
First: large snakes.
Venomous snakes and constricting
pythons killed our ancestors.
Even today, humans have an
instinctive fear of snakes.
Children as young as six months old show
fear responses to snake images, even
if they've never seen a snake before.
This fear is hardwired into our brains
through millions of years of evolution.
Second: large cats.
Leopards, in particular,
were among the most dangerous
predators early humans faced.
They're ambush predators.
They're incredibly strong.
They drag their prey into trees.
Fossil evidence shows that leopards
hunted our ancestors regularly.
We evolved an instinctive fear of
their eyes, their fangs, their roar.
And thid: large birds of prey.
Eagles and hawks could snatch children.
Even today, raptors will
occasionally attack small humans.
Our ancestors would have feared
attack from above, feared
talons and beaks and wings.
Now, here's the theory: what if the dragon
is a synthesis, a mixture, of all three?
A dragon has the body of a
snake—long, serpentine, scaled.
It has the roar and the fierce,
predatory nature of a big cat.
It has the wings and the ability to
attack from above like a bird of prey.
It's the ultimate predator, combining
everything our ancestors feared most.
Some evolutionary
psychologists go even further.
They suggest that humans might have
a kind of deep evolutionary memory,
not of dinosaurs per se, as humans
never lived alongside dinosaurs, but
of large reptilian predators like
crocodiles and monitor lizards, which
absolutely did coexist with early humans.
Crocodiles are ancient, terrifying,
and nearly impossible to kill.
They lurk in water and explode
into sudden, devastating violence.
They're basically living dragons.
And here's what makes this theory
somewhat more compelling: it explains
why children instinctively understand
dragons without being taught.
You don't have to explain
to a child what a dragon is.
You can show them a picture of a
dragon, and even if they've never
encountered the concept before,
most children will understand
immediately that it's dangerous,
powerful, something to be feared.
This suggests that the dragon
might be tapping into something
primal in our psychology.
An archetype.
A universal symbol of predatory threat.
The monster that our
ancestors feared in the dark.
But again, even if this were true, it only
goes part of the way to explaining things.
Even if our brains are wired to fear
dragon-like predators, this still
doesn't fully explain the stories we
tell about them—why dragons hoard gold,
demand virgins, or represent chaos.
For that, we need to talk
about dragons as symbols.
Because dragons were never just animals,
even when people believed they were real.
They were always symbols.
Symbols of chaos.
Of nature's power.
Of greed.
Of knowledge.
Of transformation.
In many ancient myths, dragons
represented primordial chaos—the forces
that existed before the ordered world.
In Babylonian mythology, the god
Marduk kills Tiamat, the dragon of
saltwater and chaos, and from her corpse
creates the heavens and the earth.
The act of killing the dragon
literally creates order from chaos.
This pattern repeats across cultures.
The hero kills the dragon, and in
doing so, brings order to the world.
Apollo kills the Python and
establishes his oracle at Delphi.
Saint George kills the
dragon and saves the town.
Beowulf kills the dragon and dies a hero.
The dragon is the obstacle that must be
overcome for civilisation to flourish.
But dragons also represent other things.
In many legends, dragons hoard
treasure—specifically gold.
Why?
Well, gold in mythology often
represents more than just wealth.
It represents knowledge,
power, immortality.
The dragon guarding treasure is
the dragon guarding knowledge
that humans aren't ready for.
To claim the treasure, the hero must prove
himself worthy by defeating the dragon.
In Christian symbolism, dragons became
explicitly associated with Satan and evil.
The dragon was paganism, the old
gods, the forces of darkness.
Saint George slaying the dragon was
Christianity conquering paganism.
It was good triumphing over evil.
It was the new order replacing the old.
But, you may well be thinking, this
might make sense if we’re talking about
the archetype of the bad, evil dragon.
But what about the East Asian
traditions of the good dragons,
the dragons that help and provide?
Well, here’s an interesting
theory put forward by a man
named Professor Ronald Hutton.
In Europe, by the time humans
were creating legends about
things like dragons, humans faced
no real threats from predators.
Not giant snakes or leopards.
And humans like to have large predators
to tell stories about, predators
who get killed by brave knights.
In Europe, we had none,
so we created dragons.
In China, however, there was a large
predator in the form of the tiger, which
would kill humans and was very scary, so
the Chinese had no need to create another.
And therefore Chinese dragons
became wise and benevolent.
Now, you might be thinking, “ok, so
people told stories about dragons, but
did they actually believe in them? And
if so, when did we stop believing?”
The answer is: yes they did,
and surprisingly recently.
In medieval Europe, dragons were
included in bestiaries—books that
catalogued animals and their properties.
These bestiaries listed dragons
right alongside elephants,
lions, and crocodiles.
There was no distinction between "real"
animals and "mythological" ones, because
to medieval people, dragons were real.
They were rare, certainly.
Dangerous.
Hard to find.
But real.
Medieval maps are often believed to
have marked unexplored regions with
the phrase "Here be dragons", although
interestingly, this phrase appears
on very few actual historical maps.
So it's mostly a modern
myth about medieval maps.
But the sentiment was real: the edges
of the known world were dangerous,
mysterious, possibly full of dragons.
Yet, as European explorers began
mapping the world in the 15th, 16th,
and 17th centuries, the spaces where
dragons could exist began shrinking.
Explorers sailed to the Americas.
No dragons.
They mapped the coast of Africa.
They travelled to Asia,
to the Pacific islands.
No dragons.
By the 18th century, educated
people were growing sceptical.
The Age of Enlightenment brought a more
scientific approach to the natural world.
Carolus Linnaeus created his system of
taxonomy, classifying all known animals.
Dragons didn't make the list.
And then, in the 19th century,
came a revolution in our
understanding of the past.
Paleontology emerged as a science.
People began correctly identifying
fossilised bones as extinct animals:
dinosaurs, mammoths, giant sloths.
Suddenly, we had an explanation for
the mysterious giant bones people
had been finding for millennia.
They weren't dragons.
They were animals that had died millions
of years ago, long before humans existed.
Then, when Charles Darwin published On
the Origin of Species in 1859, there
was a framework for understanding
how life on Earth had evolved.
And by the end of the 19th century,
dragons had been firmly relegated
to the realm of mythology.
But, perhaps funnily enough, this shift
from the “scary but real” to the “a good
source for myths and stories” propelled
dragons to new heights, and they started
to appear much more frequently in
stories, in books and then in films.
J.R.R. Tolkien loved dragon mythology
as a child, and dragons feature
prominently in his fantasy worlds.
And most recently, Game of Thrones
brought dragons back into mainstream
popular culture in a massive way.
So, to wrap things up, we
haven't abandoned dragons.
If anything, we've embraced them
more enthusiastically than ever.
Why?
Well, perhaps because dragons fulfill
a psychological need that facts
and science can't quite satisfy.
Dragons represent the ultimate challenge.
The ultimate obstacle to overcome.
When you defeat a dragon in a game,
or read about a hero slaying a dragon,
you're not just enjoying a story.
You're engaging with an archetype
that resonates with something
deep in human psychology.
The dragon is the fear you must face.
The challenge that seems impossible.
The transformation you must undergo
to become who you're meant to be.
And perhaps that's why dragons
appear in every culture.
Not because ancient people found
dinosaur bones, though they did.
Not because they encountered
large reptiles, though they did.
But because the dragon
represents something fundamental
about the human experience.
The struggle against chaos.
The fight against our fears.
The journey from ordinary
to extraordinary.
Dragons never existed.
But in a sense, they've always
existed, and they always will.
Not in caves or mountains
or the depths of the sea.
But in here.
In our stories.
In our imaginations.
And perhaps that's the only
place they ever needed to be.
OK then, that is it for today's episode on
dragons, the creatures that never existed
but that every culture imagined anyway.
And that brings us to the end
of this three-part mini-series
on animals throughout history.
We've covered the loyal dog, the enigmatic
cat, and the mythical dragon—three very
different relationships between humans
and animals, three very different stories.
I hope you've enjoyed this journey
through history, mythology,
and evolutionary psychology.
As always, you’ve been listening
to English Learning for Curious
Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.